172
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
Open Access and Scholarly Publishing in Latin America: Ten flavours
and a few reflections
Juan Pablo Alperin*
Gustavo E. Fischman**
John Willinsky***
Abstract Throughout this article we argue that many scholars and scientific systems in Latin
America and the Caribbean (LAC) share the ethical and epistemological motivations about the
importance of increasing the "public presence" of academic research and lay out that many
scholars and that many scholars and scientific systems in LAC are well positioned to take
advantage of the increasing information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure and
of the growing open access (OA) movement so that the research produced within the region is
circulated and shared broadly. The existence of Latin American examples to Willinsky's (2006)
ten flavours of OA to journal articles are seen as an indication that OA has taken hold in the
region.
Keywords Open Access (OA); Latin America and the Caribbean; Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT); knowledge dissemination; Scholarly Communication
Resumo Argumenta-se neste artigo que muitos acadêmicos e sistemas científicos na América
Latina e no Caribe compartilham motivações éticas e epistemológicas a respeito da importância
de se aumentar a "presença pública" da pesquisa acadêmica e que muitos deles estão bemposicionados
para se valer da crescente infra-estrutura de tecnologias de informação e
comunicação (TIC)e dos movimentos de Acesso Livre (AL) para que a ciência produzida na
região circule e se compartilhe amplamente. A existência de exemplos latino-americanos para a
classificação dos dez modelos de Willinsky para artigos de periódicos é vista como indicação de
que o AL já se instalou na região.
Palavras-chave Acesso Livre (AL); América Latina e Caribe; Tecnologias de Informação e
Comunicação (TIC); difusão do conhecimento; comunicação acadêmica

* MA in Geography, Researcher and programmer for the Public Knowledge Project. E-mail: juan@alperin.ca
** Ph.D in Education Sciences, Assoc Professor of Ed Leadership & Policy Studies Faculty, University Drive and
Mill Avenue, 302D, Tempe, AZ, mail code: 2411, Tel. (480) 965-5225,e-mail: fischman@asu.edu
*** Ph.D., Sociology of Education, Professor of Stanford University School of Education. 485 Lasuen Mall,
Stanford, CA 94305-3096, Tel. (650) 723-2102, e-mail: john.willinsky@stanford.edu
173
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
Introduction
Most scholars and academics, will undoubtedly agree that their main mission is to produce new
knowledge through research activities. In many cases, however, the motivations for engaging in
a given research project relate as much from the belief that the knowledge generated will be of
scientific interest and also about its social implications and possible contribution to the
advancement of the public good. Good intentions aside, it is also clear that many scholars have
not paid enough attention to ensure that their research results were available to the public.
The motivations for ensuring a wide dissemination of research are many and varied, but we want
to highlight two key aspects. Scientific endeavours cannot be detached from ethical and political
considerations. We firmly believe that knowledge generated through publicly sponsored research
should benefit the public, thus, scholars should place adequate care in ensuring that the “public”
has access to what was produced with public support. At the same time, there is an
epistemological motivation to place the research in a widely accessible form. That is, only
research that has been publicly scrutinized (including but not limited to traditional processes of
peer-review) can claim that the knowledge produced is accurate and meets the standards of the
academic community, and therefore it legitimately adds to the global network of knowledge1
. In
sum, we share the position of Lucas and Willinsky (2008; p.1), that “the responsibilities of the
researcher extend beyond the design, conduct, and supervision of research” and go into the way
in which research is circulated and shared.
Throughout this paper, we will argue two main points. Firstly, that many scholars and scientific
systems in Latin America and the Caribbean share the ethical and epistemological motivations
about the importance of increasing the “public presence” of academic research; Secondly, many
scholars and scientific systems in Latin America and the Caribbean are well positioned to take
advantage of the increasing information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure and
of the growing open access (OA) movement so that the research produced within the region is
circulated and shared broadly. Furthermore, it is the aim of this paper to show that Latin
American researchers have already made large progress in this process. It is our hope that by
showing the ways in which researchers in Latin America have already started to disseminate
their research more widely, other researchers in the region will be encouraged to do so.
This paper is therefore divided into four main sections. The first gives a general background of
the changes in the ICT infrastructure and use in Latin America in order to give the reader a sense
of the physical infrastructure that can aide a greater knowledge exchange. This then leads into a
discussion on the patterns of dissemination of research within the region. Through this
discussion, open access is identified as one of the methods being used by journals in Latin
America and the meaning and extent of open access is therefore discussed in the third section.
Finally, the last section uses Willinsky’s (2006) classification of open access models to show
how almost all versions of OA can already be found in Latin America.

1 These arguments are laid out in more detail in Willinsky, 2006; Lucas & Willinsky
174
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
ICTs' General Infrastructure in Latin America
While Internet usage worldwide has grown at an estimated rate of 275.4% between 2000 and
2008 worldwide, Latin American's growth is estimated at over twice this amount (603.4%)
(Nielsen/NetRatings, Retrieved May 3rd, 2008). This growth follows another period in which
the region was considered a “hot spot for the telecommunications business” (FernándezMaldonado,
2001; p2.). Although the overall penetration is still low (22.1% of the population,
Nielsen/NetRatings, Retrieved May 3rd, 2008), there are those that are hopeful that it is possible
to "enable affordable, accessible Internet connectivity and computing capabilities for 50% of the
world's population by the year 2015" (AMD, 2008). This type of growth opens up a world of
opportunities for information and knowledge exchange to take place.
Despite this growth in Internet usage, the actual levels of ICT development have been weaker
than in other parts of the world. Since the middle of the 1990s, most countries in Latin America
have increased the number of telephones and telephone connections, Internet access, the number
of computers in homes and schools, and the number of cyber cafés. However, development has
not been homogeneous across countries, regional areas, or social classes, and the lack of
trustworthy studies is a major deficiency, complicating any analysis in this area. Moreover, as
Hilbert and Katz (2003), authors of an influential ECLAC report on these issues, noted, “the lack
of information about the development of an Information Society in Latin America and the
Caribbean is a major obstacle in itself.” (p. 289). Tables 1 and 2 show the huge disparities among
countries and regions in terms of ICT infrastructure, and also the differences in the rate and
speed of the incorporation of personal computers, telephone lines, and Internet hosts, all deemed
crucial components for bridging the digital divide.
Internet
users
(per 100
people**)
PCs
(per 100
people**)
Telephone
lines
(per 1000
people*)
Mobile phones
(per 1000
people*)
Internet
hosts
(per 1000
people*)
HDI rank *
Country*
2002 2002 1990 1999 1990 1999 1995 2000
1 Norway 30.72 52.83 503 712 46 617 20.1 193.6
6 USA 50.10 62.44 545 682 21 312 21.1 179.1
34 Argentina 10.93 8 93 201 0 121 0.2 8.7
41 Costa
Rica
20.29 20.32 101 204 0 35 0.6 4.1
51 Mexico 10.69 8.30 65 112 1 79 0.2 9.2
69 Brazil 8.22 7.48 65 149 0 89 0.2 7.2
175
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
Table 1: ICT Infrastructure in selected countries
Sources: Human Development Report 2001 - http://hdr.undp.org/reports/global/2001/en/pdf/techindex.pdf
International Telecommunication Union - http://www.itu.int/ITUD/ict/statistics/at_glance/Internet02.pdf
Telephone lines
(per 1000
people)
Mobile phones
(per 1000
people)
Internet hosts
(per 1000
people)
Region
1990 1999 1990 1999 1995 2000
Middle
income
countries
22 69 34 0.1 1.0
High income
countries 473 594 13 371 11.0 96.9
Table 2: ICT Infrastructure in Middle Income and High Income regions
Another relevant measure in relation to technological development is provided by the Networked
Readiness Index Ranking (NRIR). The Networked Readiness Index (NRI) is defined as a nation’s
or community’s degree of preparation to participate in and benefit from ICT developments. The
NRI is a composite of three components: the environment for ICT offered by a given country or
community, the readiness of the community’s key stakeholders (individuals, businesses, and
governments) to use ICT, and finally, the usage of ICT among these stakeholders (Dutta & Jain,
2004, pp. 3-4).
Table 3 shows that in the Networked Readiness Index Ranking (NRIR) from 2002 to 2005,
Argentina dropped in the ranking from position 45 to 76; Mexico from 47 to 60; Costa Rica from
49 to 61; and Ecuador from 75 to 95.
176
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
Country 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-2005
Brazil 29 39 46
Chile 35 32 35
Argentina 45 50 76
México 47 44 60
Costa Rica 49 49 61
Uruguay 55 54 64
Republic Dom. 57 57 78
Trinidad & Tobago 58 52 59
Colombia 59 60 66
Jamaica 60 53 49
Panama 61 58 69
El Salvador 63 62 70
Venezuela 66 72 84
Peru 67 70 90
Guatemala 73 86 88
Ecuador 75 89 95
Paraguay 76 91 98
Bolivia 78 90 99
Nicaragua 79 94 103
Honduras 81 98 97
Haiti 82 100
Table 3: Networked Readiness Index (NRI) Rankings for Latin American Countries 2002- 2005
Source: Networked Readiness Index 2002-2003, 2003-2004, and 2004-2005.
The previous information confirms that growing investments in the areas of ICTs and
networking in Latin America are one of the most noticeable changes of the last decade, as well
as the need to improve the sustainability of the ICTs programs to consolidate the gains made
during the previous decades. Our position is that one element in that sustainability is an
increased demonstration of the value of this technology through, for example, the development
and delivery of high quality knowledge, and in particular the research and scholarship associated
with post-secondary institutions and research institutes. That is, the investment at all levels in 
177
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
these technologies will follow, to at least some degree, a sense of their contribution to the public
good.
Dissemination of scientific knowledge in Latin America
The expansion of ICTs in the region has allowed many more scientists to access to information
at affordable prices as well as to encourage their participation and collaboration in international
networks of knowledge production. Traditionally, scientific networks in Latin America have
been poorly developed despite the common language, cultural, and to certain extent social and
political affinities shared by researchers (Fernández-Maldonado, 2001) and, while it is certainly
true that knowledge flows have increased, there are some scholars who fear that the new forms
of scientific exchange will only serve to recreate the patterns of social exclusion of the past and a
dependence, on the part of the “scientific periphery,”2
 to the knowledge of the centre (Everett,
1998; Arunachalam, 2003, 2006).
One of the many ways in which the region can ensure that it does not fall pray to what Altbach
(2004) refers to as the “neo-colonialism of the 21st century” is to ensure that the region’s
academic impact be felt both regionally and globally. That is, to ensure that the Latin America’s
presence in scientific and social networks will be substantial in size, visibility, and most
importantly, quality. For this to happen, there needs to be a scientific and political effort at
strengthening scholarly publishing in the broadest sense. This must be done locally, not be
replicating the patterns of the centre, but by identifying the aspects of scholarly communications
that are being successful within the region itself. However, building the critical mass necessary
for this to happen is no small task and the barriers to publication in the region remain numerous.
As Terra-Figari (2008) points out, countries in the “scientific periphery” are hindered by
disadvantages in size, incentives, financing, language, publishing and editing parameters. The
worldwide inequalities in these categories tend to reinforce themselves through cycles of
weakness. For example, researchers are not encouraged to publish their work in journals that
have a limited international audience or not indexed in the “required and/or officially approved
lists,” and therefore journals with limited international visibility will find it more difficult to
attract the most prestigious researchers, be they regional or international, and are thus unable to
attract the type of readership required to grow. Further exacerbating the situation are the
difficulties for Latin American researchers caused by a lack of funding and limited abilities to
consult the leading journals in their field, which challenges their possibilities to conduct cuttingedge
high-quality research (Terra-Figari, 2008)
Once again, the importance of ensuring a wide dissemination of research proves to be critical, as
this has an impact in the capabilities of the regional research community itself. Similarly, we see
the positive feedback effect that dissemination can have on researchers, the institutions that
house them, and society at large, as they each benefit from quality and quantity increases in the

2
 While the terms centre and periphery have been used to denote the developed and developing world, in this paper
we will use the definition found in Mariãiç (2002; p.1) which reads: “Most of the world's scientific activities are
concentrated in a few countries, which from a global perspective can be defined as the centre. Other countries,
which for historical, economic, social, cultural reasons represent the smaller share of global scientific activity may
be characterized as the periphery.”
178
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
locally relevant research produced. The increase in quality likewise plays a positive effect on
the increased visibility of the work produced in the region, since quality work is more likely to
be sought out, but increased dissemination is unlikely to materialize if the appropriate
distribution channels are not chosen at the time of publishing.
Many advances have been made in Latin America to provide these channels, perhaps more so
than any other region in the world. This has been mainly achieved through the creation of
regional indexing systems that are able to provide access to a large portion of the region’s
scientific production. The oldest large-scale example of this is Latindex3
, which was first
conceived in 1994 and has been providing free access to a directory of journals from Latin
American since 1997 (Latindex, 2008). The following years saw the creation of Scientific
Electronic Library Online4
 (SciELO), first in Brazil and now in thirteen countries. The more
recently created Red de Revistas Cientificas de América Latina y el Caribe5
 (RedALyC) has
grown to catch the other two in size, representation, and importance. Unlike Latindex, which
provides only metadata and links to some full-text articles, both SciELO and RedALyC host
copies of every article in their databases and provide them to the public for free.
Two key features distinguish both SciELO and RedALyC from large journal portals that can be
found in the centre. The first is that these initiatives are strictly regional and were born as a
result of a common need to increase the availability and visibility of regional content for regional
and global use. The second is that both are operating entirely under an Open Access (OA)
publishing model. That is, both provide free and unrestricted access to all of the journals that
integrate them. OA is one of the key ways through which the type of broad dissemination of
research that we called at the onset of this paper is possible. To further explore this, the
remainder of this paper is focused on the forms, presence, and significance of OA in Latin
America.
Open Access
The Open Access movement has been grabbing attention worldwide in a wide variety of settings.
OA itself is not a new concept, but since the early 2000s it has dominated the publishing industry
news as well as many academic debates, symposiums, meriting special issues in journals, such as
this one. Librarians, publishers, and authors alike have began to consider the implications of this
alternative and it would seem that OA publishing, in one of the many forms that will be outlined
in this paper, are destined to play an important role in how research is both conducted and
disseminated.
The reasons and motivations that have led to this added interest and to the surge in literature
available under an OA model are many and varied (cf. Suber, 2007 for a timeline of critical
events related to OA). However, the apparent lack of information and confusion over the
meaning of OA in Latin America (Villanueva, 2006; Terra-Figari, 2008) may lead some to
believe that OA is a phenomenon concentrated in the “science central countries.” However, as

3
 Latindex – http://www.latindex.org
4
 SciELO – http:/www.scielo.org
5
 RedALyC – http://www.redalyc.org
179
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
the following section will present, the situation about OA in Latin America indicates a more
complex and shifting situation.
Haider (2005) provides a snapshot of the geographic distribution of OA journals throughout the
world. Using Ulrich’s Periodicals Directory6
 and the Directory of Open Access Journals7
(DOAJ), she estimates that while 82% of all journals are concentrated in USA/Canada and
Western Europe, these same regions only have 59% of all of the OA journals. It is unsurprising
that, in absolute numbers, these regions dominate in both the OA and non-OA realms. However,
it may be surprising to some that this stronghold is much less true when it comes to OA journals
and it may surprise even more to find that Brazil is the 3rd largest publisher of OA journals in the
world, only second to the USA and the UK. Although Brazil’s case is certainly particular,
largely influenced by the efforts and leadership the Instituto Brasileiro de Informação em Ciência
e Tecnologia8
 (IBICT), the region as a whole is far ahead of all others in the world in terms of
percentage of OA journals.
The combined efforts of researchers, public and private universities, ministries/councils of
science and technology, libraries, and others, has resulted in 13% of all Latin American journals
are OA (compared to the 3% in Canada/USA and 2% in Western Europe) (Haider, 2005). This
number rises to 51% when looking at the proportion of online journals (Haider, 2005). These
numbers should only be taken as a general guide, as they do not take into account the many other
forms of OA that exist, such as researchers placing freely available copies of their work on their
websites.
In the interest of fairness, it is important to point out that it may be misleading to attempt a
comparison between the “science central’s” OA production and that of the scientific periphery.
While this same ethical principles for providing open access hold everywhere, and are indeed
shared by many in the periphery, the perceptions of OA is bound to be different in those places
that have most suffered the consequences of limited access. The primary ethical concern found
in the centre is to provide access to two main groups on the fringes of the scientific community:
the “public” and those researchers and institutions who cannot afford to purchase subscriptions
(Haider, 2007). Latin American institutions often fall into this latter category.
Thus, the motivations for OA in Latin America have been quite different than in the centre and
have lead to a wide adoption of OA, even though OA as a movement has not been as clearly
contemplated, formulated, or planned. While in Europe, USA, and Canada, OA has been driven
in part by a rise in prices and a rise in the quantity of journals (the so-called “serials crisis”),
publications in Latin America have traditionally been free, or close enough to free (Terra-Figari,
2008). As ICTs started becoming more widespread in the region, the move to electronic form
simply meant that the already free distribution could reach an even greater number of people.
The lack of a strong publishing industry in Latin America has allowed online publishing
initiatives to flourish (Holdom, 2005), while in Europe and the USA-Canada the business of
publishing is often too lucrative to forgo (de Sagastizábal et al., 2006).
One of the outcomes of the increased attention to OA is that a lot of helpful (some would say
necessary) tools and mechanisms for publishing have been created and are at the disposition of
everyone. For example, there are open source software platforms for institutional repositories

6
 Ulrich – http://www.ulrichsweb.com/
7
 DOAJ – http://www.doaj.org
8
 IBICT – http://www.ibict.br
180
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
(e.g., MIT’s DSpace9
) and for journal management and publishing (e.g., PKP’s OJS10), as well as
a legal infrastructure (e.g., with Creative Commons11) that have all facilitated the transition to
and creation of OA content throughout the world, including Latin America. Likewise, groups
like SciELO and RedALyC are skillfully taking advantage of software developments to promote
the journals of Latin American community.
It is important to note that discussion regarding broad dissemination of scientific knowledge can
be achieved in a wide variety of forms, and not limited to academic journals. To illustrate this
point we will outline Willinsky’s (2006) ten different ‘flavours’ or models of OA. These
“flavours” present different approaches and likely strategies that could contribute to achieve the
type of broad dissemination that we are arguing is crucial for the success of Latin America as a
knowledge producing region.
Ten Flavours of Open Access in Latin America
Willinsky himself points out that some of these flavours contravene some of the rules laid out in
some of the more formal definitions of OA (e.g., “Budapest Open Archives Initiative”, 2002;
“Bethesda Statement” 2003), and should perhaps be thought of as means of increasing access to
research and scholarship. That is, all of the forms of OA publishing and archiving described
below provide better access than traditional scholarly publishing models. These descriptions are
based on the Willinsky (2006) and are enriched with examples from Latin America.
1. Homepage open access: One of the first places that researchers began to make their
work freely available on the Internet was in their personal homepages or on pages provided by
their university. Many examples of this type of access can be found, such as the on the home
page of Facultad de Informática de la Universidad de La Plata, Argentina. Home page open
access differs from institutional repositories and e-Print servers in that the later provide a global
indexing system.
2. Open access e-print archive: Many journals now permit authors to place a copy of their
work, prior to publishing or after, in open access e-print archives or institutional repositories. An
e-print archive can be organized around a discipline, as is the case for the social sciences through
the Consejo Latinoamericano de Ciencias Sociales (CLACSO) digital library or by a specific
institution, as is the case for the Universidad Nacional de Colombia. Open source software is
available for setting up e-print archives that can index the contents following the standards set by
the Open Archives Initiative. For example, the institutional repository for the Universidad
Nacional de Colombia uses MIT’s DSpace software.
3. Author fee open access: A very prominent form of open access, found especially in the
medical sciences, is based on charging authors fees ranging between $500 and $3,000 per
published article. The leading corporate open access publisher, BioMed Central, uses authors
fees with its almost 200 titles. These fees can be covered by the author through research grants
or with department funding or, in some cases, through the purchase of institutional or national

9
 DSpace – http://www.dspace.org
10 OJS – http://pkp.sfu.ca/ojs
11 Creative Commons – http://www.creativecommons.org
181
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
memberships to the journals. Currently, this model is not being widely applied in Latin
America, although the possibility certainly exits for journals to adopt this economic model. One
example is the Revista Latinoamericana de Psicología which insists that authors subscribe to the
open access publication ($60 for individuals and $120 for institutions) in order to publisher their
articles.
4. Subsidized open access: Perhaps the most common form of open access in Latin America
is the use of various subsidies that journals are able to receive from scholarly societies,
university departments, government agencies, or foundations. This form of open access does not
typically charge any fees to authors or readers and is often run on largely volunteer efforts or
with some type of non-monetary remuneration offered by universities. Among the many
examples of this type of journal is the Costa Rican journal, Población y Salud en Mesoamérica.
5. Dual-mode open access: Some journals have preferred to maintain a print publication
despite their interest in switching to being open access. Many of these journals have started
publishing an online open-access version that is available immediately and have maintained a
traditional subscription model to offset the costs of a print version of the publication. This type
of access can be seen in the Revista Argentina de Microbiología who charge $50 to
Argentinians, $80 to Latin Americans, and $100 for other countries for a print version of the
journal and provide free access through their webpage, SciELO, and RedALyC.
6. Delayed Open Access: One of the two modes of open access that are intended to
encourage the purchase of subscriptions, while still providing open access, is to provide open
access to content only after a number of months have passed since the original publication.
Journals can sell print and online subscriptions for those readers that want access to articles
immediately and provide free access to those that are willing to wait. The journals at the Colegio
de Mexico all follow this model.
7. Partial open access: Another approach to attracting subscriptions while still providing
some open access is to provide open access to only some of the contents of the journal while
restricting the rest to subscribed users. This type of access helps increase the visibility of a
journal through its open access content and encourages readers to purchase subscriptions of other
articles they have seen while browsing the journal. No Latin American examples of this type of
access were found, but it is another possibility for those journals worried about losing the income
generated from providing free access.
8. Per capita open access: Programs such as the World Health Organization’s HINARI
project has provided access to over 2,000 medical journals to those countries that have a per
capita income of less than $1,250. With HINARI, countries with per capita income of $1,250-
$3,500 pay $1,000 per institution per year for access to the same journals. In Latin America,
Bolivia, Guayana, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Paraguay all qualify for free access and
Colombia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Jamaica, Peru, and
Suriname qualify for the discounted price.
9. Open access indexing: Open access indexing has become a terrific source for finding
publications that would otherwise only be found through commercial databases. While articles
themselves may not be open source, there are many indexes that are providing access to article
metadata so that researchers can at least know of article’s existence. One such example is OAHermes,
based out of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM). This open
access index provides a unified search engine for a wide variety of sources from both Latin 
182
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
America and elsewhere, including SciELO, RedALyC, and the UNAM itself.
10. Open access cooperative: The final form of open access presented by Willinsky (2006) is
the cooperative, which can form among publishers, such as scholarly societies, or among
publishers and libraries, as they work together to ensure the most efficient form of knowledge
dissemination. This type of access is one that is perhaps best exemplified in Latin America with
the SciELO project. SciELO works through the implementation of a common model and
methodology in all the member countries. In each country, SciELO works with partners who
collectively benefit from each other’s efforts.
Type of open
access
Economic models Journal or portal example
Home page University department maintains
home pages for individual faculty
members on which they place their
papers and make them freely
available.
Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile – Matemática
http://www.mat.puc.cl/publicaciones/
E-print
archive
An institution or academic subject
area underwrites the hosting and
maintenance of repository software,
enabling members to self-archive
published and unpublished
materials.
Universidad Nacional de Colombia
http://www.digital.unal.edu.co/dspace
/
Author fee Author fees support immediate and
complete access to open access
journals (or, in some cases, to the
individual articles for which fees
were paid), with institutional and
national memberships available to
cover author fees.
Revista Latinoamericana de
Psicología
http://www.rlpsi.org/index2.html
Subsidized Subsidy from scholarly society,
institution and/or
government/foundation enables
immediate and complete access to
open access journal.
Población y Salud en Mesoamérica
http://ccp.ucr.ac.cr/revista/index.htm
Dual-mode Subscriptions are collected for print
edition and used to sustain both
print edition and online open access
edition.
Revista Argentina de Microbiología
http://www.aam.org.ar/revistas.php
Delayed Subscription fees are collected for
print edition and immediate access
to online edition, with open access
provided to content after a period of
time (e.g., six to twelve months).
Revistas del Colegio de Mexico
http://revistas.colmex.mx/
183
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
Partial Open access is provided to a small
selection of articles in each issue —
serving as a marketing tool —
whereas access to the rest of the
issue requires subscription.
Per capita Open access is offered to scholars
and students in developing
countries as a charitable
contribution, with expense limited
to registering institutions in an
access management system.
HINARI
http://www.who.int/hinari
Indexing Open access to bibliographic
information and abstracts is
provided as a government service
or, for publishers, a marketing tool,
often with links to pay per view for
the full text of articles.
OA Hermes
http://oa-hermes.unam.mx/oahermes.html
Cooperative Member institutions (e.g., libraries,
scholarly associations) contribute to
support of open access journals and
development of publishing
resources.
SciELO
http://www.scielo.org
Table 4. Ten flavours of open access to journal articles
Source: Willinsky (2006)
Conclusion
Throughout this article we have been advancing the idea that the expansion and consolidation of
OA, in any of its “flavours” will be of great benefit not only for Latin America’s scholars, but
also for advancing the well being of the notion of the “public good” at the local and global
levels. We consider that scholars, scientist and academics in general should seriously consider to
incorporate into their work the access principle “a commitment to the value and quality of
research carries with it the responsibility to extend the circulation of this work as far as possible,
and ideally to all who are interested in it and all who might profit from it” (Willinsky, 2005, p.
5).
We are aware of the differences and inequities in the processes of production, circulation and
legitimization of scientific knowledge, and have already recognized our own dissatisfaction with
the notions of “central” and “periphery” with regards to academic production. No doubt, OA by
itself cannot solve all the issues related to those inequities, and the always-critical issue of
scientific excellence, relevance and quality. The combination of online presence and open access
is changing the geometry to a degree, as there is more of a global knowledge exchange, a greater 
184
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
circulation of work, than was taking place with print. For this reason, and with this goal of
exchange and circulation in mind, it makes sense for those with an interest in the future of
knowledge to continue to look for new ways of using these technologies to advance the quality
and reach of this work.
We firmly believe that any research project should be developed including conscious steps to
make the circulation and exchange of knowledge as available as “feasible” as possible.
Undoubtedly, the feasibility of making all the knowledge produced by a research project
“public” will depend on the contextual and institutional limits (e.g., economic and/or
educational), but the point to stress is that the introduction of ICTs allows for envisioning an
extended concept of what the “public” is. Undoubtedly, the type of distribution of knowledge
that Internet affords is beyond what was possible to imagine with print technologies. In this
context one of the important tasks is to consider how OA can be applied to improve
simultaneously, the scholarly and social value of research-based knowledge.
Finally, we want to highlight that doing research today requires reflecting and engaging with
new publishing technologies, such as OA. Researchers throughout the world should consider the
ethical implications and scientific potential of making their research publicly available. We can
only speculate about this but, it is our understanding and hope that a deeper commitment to
forms such as OA demands from researchers other forms of public responsibility and
accountability that will result in the strengthening of scientific production as well as a more
substantive contribution to the democratization of access to knowledge.
Artigo recebido em 04/05/2008 e aprovado em 09/06/2008.
References
ALTBACH, P. G. (2004). Globalisation and the university: Myths and realities in an unequal
world. Tertiary Education and Management, 10(1), 3-25.
AMD. (2008). AMD’s 50 by 15 initiative. Retrieved May 13th, 2008, From:
http://www.50x15.com/en-us/about.aspx
BABINI, D., & SMART, P. (2006). Using digital libraries to provide online access to social
science journals in Latin America. Learned Publishing, 19, 107-113.
De SAGASTIZÁBAL, L., RUBIO, L., & GONZÁLEZ SORO, A. (2006). Editoriales
universitarias de América Latina y el Caribe. In IESALC. Informe Sobre la Educación Superior
en América Latina y el Caribe 2000-2005: La Metamorfosis de la Educación Superior (217-230).
Caracas, Venezuela: Instituto Internacional de la UNESCO para la Educación Superior en
América Latina y el Caribe. In: http://redaluc.uaemex.mx SciELO. (2008). Scientific Electronic
Library Online. URL: http://www.scielo.org
185
Liinc em Revista, v.4, n.2, setembro 2008, p. 172 - 185 - http://www.ibict.br/liinc
FERNÁNDEZ-MALDONADO, A. M. (Ed.). (2001). Opportunities and risks of the Latin
America cybespace. Presented at 2nd Global Congress on Community Networking, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
HAIDER, J. (2005). The geographic distribution of open access journals. Poster Presentation at
ICML 9, World Congress on Health Information and Libraries. Salvador/Bahia, Brazil,
September 20-23. URL: http://www.soi.city.ac.uk/~ch696/icml9_poster_haider.pdf
HAIDER, J. (2007). Of the rich and the poor and other curious minds: On open access and
“development”. Perspectives, 59(4/5), 449-461.
HILBERT, M., & KATZ, J. (2003). Building and information society: A Latin American and
Caribbean perspective. Santiago de Chile: ECLAC.
LATINDEX. (2008). Sistema Regional de Información en Línea para Revistas Científicas de
América Latina, el Caribe, España y Portugal. URL: http://www.latindex.unam.mx
LUCAS, R., WIllinsky, J. (In Press). Open Access to E-Research. In N. Jankowski (Ed.), eResearch:
Transformations in Scholarly Practice. London: Routledge.
MARIÃIÇ, S. (2002). Scholarly journals from science periphery: Towards a common
methodology for evaluating their scientific communicability? Croatian Information and
Documentation Society. En: http://dlist.sir.arizona.edu/87/
NIELSEN//NetRatings. (2008). Internet World Stats: World Internet Usage Statistics. Retrieved
May 3rd, 2008, From: http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm
PRABHA, C. (2007). Shifting from print to electronic journals in ARL university libraries.
Serials Review, 33(1), 4-13.
REDALYC. (2008). Red de Revistas Científicas de América Latina y el Caribe, España y
Portugal. URL: http://www.redalyc.org
SUBER, P. (2007). Timeline of the open access movement. Retrieved May 5th, 2008, From:
http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/timeline.htm
TERRA FIGARI, L.I. (2008). Diseminación del conocimiento académico en América Latina.
Montevideo. In Antropología Social Y Cultural En Uruguay 2007. Uruguay: UNESCO.
VILLANUEVA, E. (2006). Accidental open access and the hazards involved: Preliminary
experiences on internet-based publishing in a peruvian university. First Monday, 11(6).
WILLINSKY, J. (2006). The access principle: The case for open access to research and
scholarship. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 