Alperin, J.P., Fischman, G.E. & Willinsky, J. (forthcoming). Scholarly
Communication Strategies in Latin America's Research-Intensive Universities. Revista
Educación Superior y Sociedad.
Stanford University makes this peer-reviewed final draft available under a Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial License. The published version is available from the publisher, subscribing
libraries, and the author.
Scholarly Communication Strategies in Latin America's ResearchIntensive
Universities
Juan Pablo Alperin
Gustavo E. Fischman
John Willinsky
Introduction
Open Access—scholarship that is ―digital, online, free of charge, and free of most
copyright and licensing restrictions‖ (Suber, 2011)—has dramatically changed the
research landscape in universities worldwide in the twenty-first century.1
In Latin
America, regional Open Access initiatives (if not officially labeled ―open access‖) have
permeated most research-intensive universities and national science evaluation systems
and have begun to alter the way that local research is perceived. Furthermore, the
prominence of Open Access, regionally and globally, has become a significant force in
transforming previous traditions and systems used by universities in Latin America in the
production and access to scientific knowledge, having a profound influence on its
position within what might be thought of as the global knowledge exchange.
What has become clear is that Latin American journals are using the open access
publishing model to a far greater extent than other regions arising out of both the sense of
public mission among the Latin American University (LAU)
2
and open access‘s
effectiveness for sharing knowledge, and there is reason to believe that this is
contributing to an increased presence and impact for this literature. As well, journals in
this region are increasingly turning to large-scale non-commercial open access publishing
portals to build the reputation of journals that meet accepted ―international‖ editorial
standards. And thirdly, journals in the region are employing open source software
solutions, principally Open Journal Systems, to manage their publishing processes online.
These current initiatives speak encouragingly to the region‘s growing contribution to a
global knowledge exchange and to the research literature‘s standing as a public good. At

1
Peter Suber (2011), one or the most prominent Open Access advocates, provides a terrific
overview of Open Access, including a timeline, overview, and the concise definition presented here. See
also for a broad overview on Open Access, Willinsky (2006).
2 Given the great diversity in the Latin American higher education landscape, the term ―Latin
American University‖ as used here is not intended to encompass all Latin American institutions. Rather, it
is intended to represent the institutions that are providing a model for the rest (see Bernasconi, 2007).
the same time, this assessment of scholarly publishing in Latin America suggests that
further advances could be achieved through increased coordination, technical
efficiencies, and editorial support in the integration of these initiatives.
The Budapest Open Access Initiative (BOAI), drafted in a meeting organized by
the Open Society Institute in December of 2001, gave this emergent movement its name
Open Access (OA) and some definitions of what that meant. The initiative begins by
noting that OA is made possible by the convergence of ―an old tradition and a new
technology … The old tradition is the willingness of scientists and scholars to publish the
fruits of their research in scholarly journals without payment, for the sake of inquiry and
knowledge. The new technology is the internet.‖ (―Budapest Open Access Initiative,‖
2002; opening paragaph). In Latin America, the broad embrace of OA was entirely
consistent, in a very timely way, with the latest of many transformations to the higher
education system in the last decades.
The transformations explored by many of the authors (Bernasconi, 2007;
Didriksson, 2007; Gentili & Levy, 2005; Malagón Plata, 2008; López Segrera, 2007;
Fischman, 2008; just to name a few) include: expanded enrolments; consolidation of the
private sector (in some countries the largest provider of higher education services);
acceptance of social sectors previously excluded from the universities; expansion of
fields of study; expansion of graduate programs (MAs, MBAs, and PhDs);
implementation of accreditation and national evaluation practices; incorporation of new
forms of delivery of classes (TV, hybrid, online); and great expansion in the use of
computers. These transformations were spurred on by a blend of local and global
demands, needs, and environments, with this latest set of developments reflecting the
impact of the digital era on scholarly communication, especially as digital technologies
enable significantly greater levels of participation and distribution in this communication
(Babini & Fraga, 2006; Fischman, Alperin, & Willinsky, 2010; Holdom, 2005; TerraFigari,
2007).
Collectively, these transformations have presented a serious challenge to a model
of university that focused on professional preparation and ―state-building‖ (Ordorika &
Pusser, 2007), where research was done by a small group of scholars often located in the
most prestigious institutions and centers (Balan, 2007; Malagón Plata, 2005).
3
In
response to those challenges, many institutions are adopting a more ―research intensive‖
model.
4
Two global trends in particular are entangled with the transformations
themselves, leading to the of the research intensiveness (Bernasconi, 2007). The first is a
complex combination of economic conditions, state budget limitations, and massive
expansion of enrolments coupled with the rapid expansion of the private sector that have
undercut the prominent role of the national universities, making questions about access
to, and the quality of, higher education more complex than ever. The second is the
worldwide rise of the U.S. idea of a research university, which has gained ascendancy as
the model to follow (Bernasconi, 2007). A third trend, intricately tied to the previous two,

3 Ordorika and Pusser (2007) note that institutions like the Universidade de São Paulo, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM) and the Universidad de Buenos Aires can be considered ―statebuilding
universities,‖ responsible in large part for ―building the material conditions for the expansion and
consolidation of their respective States, as well as the intellectual and social legitimacy of those states‖
(192)
4 While the word model has multiple meanings, in this context ―model‖ primarily refers to the
definition that pertains to the idea of an ―example to follow‖ 
is the emphasis on developing alternative sources of funding for higher education, as well
as the increasing social demands for universities to contribute to social and economic
development (Arocena & Sutz; 2001; Thorn & Soo, 2006; p3).
5
The three trends all lead
to increased importance of ―research activities‖ among most universities in the region,
including its incursion into institutions not typically associated with scientific research.
The open access movement has complemented these transformations and global
trends. In one sense, OA could not appear in Latin America without the increasing role of
research in the LAU. After all, OA cannot exist without a body of literature that can be
opened. But in another sense, OA is a significant player in shaping the research landscape
and it is OA and OA initiatives that drive some of the transformations. This paper seeks
to document some of these initiatives and how they are affecting the evaluation of
research, the definition of editorial quality, and the organization of the research itself in
the digital era. We begin, however, with a brief exploration of the changing role of
research in the LAU landscape.
Research in the New LAU Landscape
Access to research is bound to play a pivotal role in the very possibility of a researchfocused
university landscape. The shift towards the research and entrepreneurial
university was facilitated, at many points, by the rise of the Internet and the first
experiments in electronic publishing, both of which are integral parts of the OA
movement, research dissemination, and scholarly communication today. However,
whether freely disseminated or not, research was circulating much more widely via the
Web, with increasing emphasis on the bibliometrics of citation rates and impact factors
(De Bellis, 2009) as a result of publishing becoming the defining aspect of an
institution‘s reputation. As a result, LAUs are driven by a growing awareness of their
research output, fuelled through their own imperative or through national policies.
A further reflection of this greater focus on research and knowledge-production is
found in the increase in post-graduate degrees awarded in the region. Aupetit (2007)
reports an increase in the number of doctoral degrees awarded in Latin America and the
Caribbean as 298% between 1993 and 2003, although the figure drops to 181% if one
takes Brazil out of the equation, while Master‘s degrees increase threefold (RICYT,
2010). Brazil leads Latin America in with over 50% of researchers (both in Universities
and at research centers) holding doctorate degrees, but other countries such as Argentina,
Colombia, Ecuador, and Uruguay have between 10–25% of their researchers with
doctorate degrees (Aupetit, 2007).
The increase in researcher preparation, as a result of the increase of post-graduate
programs, has also been supported at the national level in many countries. From the
1980s onward, Latin America enacted policies to professionalize the research career, as
another in the moves toward a global alignment within higher education. The National
System of Researchers in Mexico was established in 1983 as a way of providing
incentives and rewards for carrying on research activities within the scope of academic
careers. Other countries followed suit, such as the Venezuela with the Program for the
Promotion of the Researcher and Argentina‘s Researcher Career program through the
national science council.

5 The increased emphasis worldwide to connect research carried out at universities with the external
world, and in particular with the economy, is often referred to as the third mission.
The establishment and management of such programs required a means through
which to encourage, measure, and reward research output. Most countries seemed to have
opted, at least in this initial phase, for rewarding the production of those who were able to
demonstrate their participation in already established research elites, as indicated by
collaboration with research institutions or through publication in the highest ranked
journals of the global North. In their earlier iterations, research-promotion programs
relied on existing ―gold standards,‖ such as the Science Citation Index (SCI), that
provides a limited list of ranked publications.
6
This reliance on American and European
measures ensured that only a very small number of scholars were recognized, with no
middle ground or clear ladder of development within the region. This reliance also
ensured that certain disciplines, such as the medical sciences, were rewarded since
publishing in international journals was already an existing practice, at least for the top
researchers in the region. A collateral result, however, was that foreign (and mostly
English-language) journals were recognized as the place of ―real‖ scholarship, which
contributed little if anything to the growth and development of scholarly communication
and publishing within the region.
Even today, and certainly more so the case earlier, the SCI has very few Latin
American journals7
and is comprised in large part of English-language publications.
8
McVeigh (2004) reported that of the 239 OA journals indexed by the ISI in 2003, 33
were from South and Central America, compared to 58 for North America and 45 for
Western Europe. The percentage shares of OA of all indexed journals for the same
regions were 42,3 %, 1,5 % and 1,1 % respectively, clear evidence of how fast
established high quality Latin American journals had made their e-versions openly
available. A recent study by Chinchilla-Rodriguez & Moya Anegon (2010) has shown
that of all the roughly 15000 peer reviewed journals indexed in 2010 in the Scopus
database, the proportions that were OA were 73,9 % for Latin America, 4,9 % for North
America and 6,9 % for Europe respectively. As we come back to later, OA has caused an
important shift away from the use of databases such as SCI and Scopus as a measure of
scientific output, but we cannot ignore the fact that journals indexed in SCI are still
amongst the most highly rewarded mediums for disseminating research. These have
traditionally been the most highly cited journals, so this recognition is not unwarranted,
but SCI was a late print phenomenon in a world that is now entering a digital era, in
which new approaches are bound to flourish, before new standards take shape. In the
meantime, the use of SCI bibliometrics as the sole measure of research quality has
pervaded the evaluations systems of both Latin American national science councils and
Latin American universities, and done so on the very eve of the eclipse of the printjournal
culture out of which it arose.
Thus the importance of attending to how these systems of evaluations have become
significantly more complex, as national science councils and universities attempt to

6
Science Citation Index forms part of the ISI Web of Science, owned by Thompson Reuters, which
indexes and collects citations from a selective list of approximately 8,000 journals across all disciplines
7 Red de Indicadores de Ciencia y Tecnología -Iberoamericana e Interamericana (RICYT) reports
that LAC makes up 4.27% of papers cited in SCI for 2008 (RICYT, 2010), despite LAC making up a much
larger portion of the world population.
8 As a point of comparison, Canada (a country of just over 30 million) comprises 4.25% of the 2008
citations in SCI. The United States of America, not surprisingly, comprises a much larger proportion with
28.84% of all citations in SCI in 2008 (RICYT, 2010).
codify traditional evaluation mechanisms in the midst of radical digital-era changes in
scholarly communication. One result of this approach is that the same criteria is used to
evaluate all scientists and scholars across all fields, even as SCI and related measures
have never provided equal coverage of disciplines and regions.
In many cases, countries opted for generating lists of places where publishing was
considered more desirable—a practice that continues today. Argentina‘s national science
council, for example, evaluates Argentinian journals for inclusion into a list of what is
considered a ―core‖ national journal.
9
The list is currently comprised of 138 journals,
with 88 titles from the Social Sciences and Humanities, 22 from the Natural and Exact
Sciences, and 6 from Engineering, Agricultural, and Material Sciences.
In other cases, national science councils opt for classifying all journals based on
editorial criteria such as the use of external peer reviewers, the number of subscribers,
and percentage of original research published. Colombia, one of several countries with an
elaborate evaluation system, classifies journals under an A1, A2, B, or C scheme.
10 These
journal classifications are subsequently used in faculty and researcher evaluations, under
the auspices of the research incentive programs described above.
The difference between an ―A‖ (top-tier) and a ―B‖ (second-tier) journal in many
cases depends on the so-called ―international‖ quality of the journal, largely referring to
whether it is English-language or not (Lillis & Curry, 2010). In Colombia, and probably
elsewhere, the classifications do not accurately reflect the international visibility and
usage (Romero-Torres, Tejada & Acosta, 2010). Yet, such definitions have been in place
for several years have been largely institutionalized, but not completely entrenched.
Recently, the Venezuelan Program for the Promotion of the Researcher, organized
by the Venezuelan National Science Council changed to favour scholars who publish in
Latin American journals. Until 2002, this program gave the highest recognition and
rewards for publishing in journals indexed by SCI. However, since 2003, articles
published in certain regional OA portals qualify for the top recognition. This change
resulted in the rise of the number of researchers that qualify for the program and in an
increased recognition for set of journals, including national social science and humanities
titles, that goes well beyond those included in SCI (Marcano & Phélan, 2009).
The standards by which journals are judged ―international‖, and thus of higher
quality than national or regional, are at play with scholarship‘s assumed universality in its
methods, practices, and norms. The burden of these distinctions is palpable among
researchers and scholars in the region. In a previous study, we found that the debate
around what constitutes scholarship/science was often heated and especially pitted those
from the arts, social sciences, and humanities against those in the natural sciences, around
issues of, for example, the language of communication, between the sciences‘ preference
for English (that is, ―international‖) or the others use of Spanish or Portuguese (that is,
―regional‖) (Fischman et al., 2010). In Fischman et al. (2010), we also warn of the
dangers that this creates by fomenting a particular style of journals—those that are most
like other journals already indexed in the SCI.

9 The requirements for classifying as a core journal can be found at:
http://www.caicyt.gov.ar/nucleo-basico-de-revistas-cientificas/requisitos
10 Details of the classification criteria can be found at
http://scienti.colciencias.gov.co:8084/publindex/docs/informacionCompleta.pdf
One of the dangers of focusing attention to such journals is that only ―generic‖ or
―colonized‖ journals will emerge from the region. Furthermore, the academic community
has a disincentive to submit, peer-review, or form part of the editorial board of journals
that do not belong to accepted lists or are not considered ―international.‖ Yet, the research
community is far better served by having a wide range of journals operating at different
levels of scholarly competitiveness, so that researchers have opportunities (a) to publish
while they are still learning the ropes, (b) to climb the ranking ladder, rather than having
to make the leap to top-ranked journals in a single bound, and (c) to participate in peerreview
and editorial processes that also help to forge a research culture.
The risks involved in not building up this range and depth of journals have been
noted within Latin American academic community. As LAUs transform into researchintensive
institutions, a number of OA initiatives have accompanied the changes and
provided new ways—and new outlets—for disseminating Latin American scholarship.
The next section outlines some of the most important initiatives, which leads to the role
that these initiatives have played during the transformation of the LAU.
Open Access Initiatives
One of the responses to many of the issues outlined above, and with funding from the
Panamerican Health Organization and the Science Foundation of the State of Sao Paulo
in Brazil, was the launching of the Scientific Electronic Library Online (SciELO) in
1997.
11 SciELO began as a purely Brazilian initiative for journals from the medical
sciences. Since then, SciELO has come to provide a portal with free full-text online
access to 817 journals. More than providing access to these journals, SciELO enabled for
the first time, information about citations to Latin American publications that are not part
of SCI.
In many ways, SciELO quickly became Latin America‘s very own version of a
SCI, with all its virtues and weaknesses. In its original iterations, SciELO only admitted
journals from the medical sciences and later other sciences, such as physics, chemistry
and mathematics leading to much resentment from those in other disciplines for
propagating the notion that the scholarship produced by sociologists, psychologist, or
anthropologist and those working within the so-called soft sciences were not real
scientists. One of the responses to SciELO‘s disciplinary focus, was the formation in
2002 of the Red de Revistas Científicas de América Latina y el Caribe, España y Portugal
(RedALyC).
12 At its outset RedALyC was focused entirely on the social sciences. As
both portals grew and began to indirectly compete with one another—over which one
would be considered Latin America‘s repository of top-tier journals—both removed their
disciplinary restrictions (although evidence in RedALyc‘s historical focus are still
evident, with 532 of the current 758 journals in the social sciences and humanities).
What is interesting to note, however, is that neither of these initiatives was borne
out of the Open Access movement per se, although both portals provided, from the onset,
free and unrestricted access to their content. The compliance with the OA definition was
not done as part of a philosophical imperative, but rather out of the overriding objective
of providing visibility to the research produced regionally. In fact, the open access
movement in Latin America has been widely embraced, but with little conscience of its

11 The regional SciELO site and links to country-specific sites can be found at: http://scielo.org
12 The RedALyC portal can be found at: http://redalyc.org
existence (Alperin, Fischman, & Willinsky, 2008; Villanueva, 2006; Merelo, 2010). With
global participation in Open Access running at somewhat over 20% of the research
literature (Björk B-C et al. 2010), it seems clear that LAU are utilizing this model to a far
greater extent, judging by the two principal portals and the work cited earlier of
Chinchilla-Rodriguez & Moya Anegon (2010). Given that OA became the prevalent
mode of publication without conscious alignment with the OA movement, one must be
cautious when asking questions regarding the role of open access on the LAU and on
Latin American scholarship.
In the following section we provide some insight on the role of that OA has played
in the region, which, in large part, is the role of these two OA initiatives. The boundary of
what can be attributed to OA as a movement versus what can be attributed to OA
initiatives is not clear. As the strongest leaders of OA in the region, SciELO and
RedALyC are intricately tied to the movement, despite being conceived in parallel. There
are, of course, other portals, initiatives, journals, and policies that can and should be
noted. Among them, the UNESCO World Social Science Report 2010 specifically
mentions the digital library project of the Consejo Latinoamericano de Ciencia Sociales
(CLACSO)13 and African Journals Online (AJOL)
14, as well as the two aforementioned
projects. All four instances, three in Latin America and one in Africa, are examples of
wide scale provision of digital content generated within the region as a way of increasing
the visibility of local research through the benefits of economies of scale. We would add
to the list the numerous institutional journal portals at universities such as the
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico, the Universidad Nacional de Colombia,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (Brazil), and the Universdad Nacional de La
Plata (Argentina).15 Regardless of any of these projects‘ explicit alignment with the OA
movement, their inception and insertion into the institutions that govern Latin American
scholarship has had profound effects on both the output and consumption of Latin
American research.
Open Access and Evaluating Research
Among the most prominent places where OA has played a role has been in broadening
the visibility, recognition, and impact of journals published in Latin America. As SciELO
and RedALyC gained in numbers and spread across the region, they began to garner the
critical mass necessary for drawing regional and international attention. The linear
growth of RedALyC and SciELO titles has persisted over time and shows no immediate
sign of saturation (

13 http://www.clacso.org.ar
14 http://ajol.info
15 Respectively, these four portals can be found at http://journals.unam.mx/,
http://revistas.unal.edu.co/, http://seer.ufrgs.br/, and http://www.revistas.unlp.edu.ar/. Such portals are too
numerous to list here.
Figure 1). In the first months of 2011, RedALyC received 8.5% of discernible visits from
the United States and over 15% from outside Latin America, the Caribbean, Spain and
Portugal.16 The attention and prestige associated with the portals themselves gets ascribed
to its journals, and literally connects Latin America to the global community. If by no
other measure, the critical mass of journals at scielo.org and redalyc.org ensures higher
search engine ranking (in Google, Google Scholar, Bing, Yahoo, etc) for all of the
journals.17 This affords them the designation of ―international‖ within Latin America
when it comes to government endorsement of journal publications.

16 Usage by country cannot be accurately determined from the statistics provided, as 46% of visits
are not geo-located. Details of access by country can be found at
http://redalyc.uaemex.mx/redalyc/stats/estUsu/RptGral/Enero-Junio_11_vispai.html
17 None of the major search engines make their ranking algorithm public, but unofficial page rank
calculators such as checkpagerank.net and prchecker.info suggest that both http://scielo.org and
http://redalyc.org are ranked 8/10.
Figure 1 Number of Journals in RedALyC and SciELO since 2002 (Source: http://archive.org
snapshots of http://www.scielo.org and http:www.redalyc.org, not all years available)
The higher visibility achieved both in the real and virtual worlds have become, at
least in some instances, valid measures of internationality, as seen by their inclusion in
some national evaluations in the region (Marcano & Phelan, 2009). As the visibility of
journals in these portals increased, their acceptance as valid measures of ―quality‖—
however that is defined—ensured that the portals played a role in researcher incentive
systems. In many instances, the relationship between the core lists and the national
science councils is further blurred, as the councils are the same institutions who fund and
manage the national SciELO portals. Such arrangements mean that journals have `to
prove that they are ―high quality‖ to make it into the portal, which only serves to further
separate the journals that are in the portal and those that are not on the basis of this
ascribed reputation, while doing little to help journals across the board to improve their
scholarly quality and processes, An early example of this arrangement was found in the
first SciELO site outside of Brazil in Chile (scielo.cl) through the CONICYT, but
SciELO sites are also administered or directly funded by the national governments of
Argentina (scielo.org.ar), Brazil (scielo.br), Peru (scielo.org.pe), and Venezuela
(scielo.ve). Even in places where the science council is not financing or administering the
SciELO portals, there have been instances where SciELO is explicitly mentioned in lists
of ―international‖ indexes that count towards making a journal part of the core list (i.e., in
Colombia).
In Argentina, where the same government agency is in charge of administering the
SciELO site and creating a list of core national publications (CAICyT), the relationship is
one to one. When a journal is considered of sufficient quality to join the core list of
journals, it is allowed to enter the SciELO site. As another example, in Colombia, the 
SciELO site is administered from within the Universidad Nacional de Colombia, but
COLCIENCIAS has included SciELO in its list of acceptable international indexes
necessary for a journal to be classified as an ―A‖ journal. The same is true for Venezuela.
In fact, Venezuela has also embraced RedALyC as a sufficient measure of quality,
coordinating with the RedALyC selection committee so as to have a one-to-one
correlation between Venezuelan journals in the RedALyC portal and Venezuelan journals
that form part of the national list of top journals.
Their accreditation of OA portals in national systems of evaluation challenge the
notion that the best science can be found outside the region. SciELO and RedALyC have
already become a credible and local alternative to publishing in the scientific ―center.‖ As
Guédon (2010) point out, initiatives like SciELO (and by extension RedALyC) are one
possible way for the boundaries between ―center‖ and ―peripheries‖ of science to be
further blurred. However, the degree of success OA in general and these initiatives in
particular are having on blurring these boundaries is yet to be determined.
Through the traditional rankings of journals and measuring of citations, namely SCI
and more recently Scopus, the evidence suggests that the boundary has not yet been
sufficiently blurred. While the number of Latin American articles indexed in SCI has
more than doubled between 1997 and 2007 (Albornoz, Matos Macedo & Alfaraz, 2010),
authors and articles receive fewer citations than their counterparts from other parts of the
world (Meneghini, Packer, & Nassi-Calò, 2008; Hermes-Lima, Santos, Alencastro,
Ferreira, 2007). Yet, the aggregation of publications within OA portals such as SciELO
and RedALyC permit further analysis that provides an alternate perspective.
There are few such studies, but work by Packer and Meneghini (2007) suggests that
as of 2005, 9% of citations in the Brazilian SciELO site were to other Brazilian SciELO
journals. The same study shows that over 70% of citations are to journals covered by the
SCI, suggesting that the two spheres of science are connected. What the study does not
show, however, are the citations going in the other direction (from SCI journals to
SciELO journals). A map of those citations, or any alternative measure, would provide a
clearer picture of the effect of the OA portals in blurring the boundaries between the
centre and periphery mentioned.
We want to make two other related points. First, is that there is evidence to suggest
there are those scholars and journals that are purposefully ―staying local‖ with their
publications, presumably because their target audience is located nationally (Meneghini,
Mugnaini & Packer, 2006). Second, recent work by Babini (2011) suggests that SciELO
and (to a lesser extent) RedALyC already reflect the output of the most prominent
institutions. As just one example, lists of the 50 institutions with most research and most
visibility from the Scopus-SCImago and SciELO databases coincide on 36 institutions
(Babini, 2011). The implication is that the SciELO database is capturing a segment of the
research output that compliments that in so-called ―international‖ databases.
Yet, a definitive picture of the degree to which OA and OA initiatives have opened
Latin America literature to the rest of the world and vice versa remains elusive. What is
clear, however, is that these OA initiatives are leading to a levelling of the publishing
playing field, with new OA titles turning up among the search results with scholarship
published in the traditional ―high-prestige‖ channels, such as the journals in the SCI.
Furthermore, the portals themselves have been incorporated into national and institutional
evaluation systems and, as a direct consequence, have allowed the initiatives themselves 
to play a role in the definition of editorial quality. The following section examines this
role.
Defining Editorial Standards for Platform Admission
The legitimacy afforded by national and institutional evaluation systems allowed the
major OA initiatives to become synonymous with high editorial standards. They were not
incorporated into the systems of evaluation by sheer existence or size, but rather, by
imposing certain standards around editorial quality. These standards have come, over
time, to define the editorial characteristics of a quality scholarly journal. The oldest
regional initiative related to the quality of scientific publications in Latin America, the
Sistema Regional de Información en Línea para Revistas Científicas de América Latina,
el Caribe, España y Portugal (Latindex), set out a list of criteria to be used for entering
their catalogue as early as 1997. The list now contains over 30 criteria such as using peer
review, having an ISSN, displaying an editorial board. The two main portals discussed so
far, SciELO and RedALyC, have both adopted similar criteria as the requirements for
inclusion.
The three lists have converged, with eleven common to all three lists and eight
common to at least two (Table 1). In effect, these three initiatives have created a standard
set of editorial criteria that all academic journals can look-up to and strive towards. These
three sets of editorial criteria and the inclusion of one or more of the portals into national
systems of evaluation, appears as an emerging trend, signalling the characteristics of what
is considered a ―high quality‖ Latin American publication.
The criteria can be generally grouped into three categories: those aimed at
increasing internationality, those aimed at ensuring quality, and those aimed at improving
metadata/indexing. The adoption, or even consideration, of these criteria as a standard set
has implications for the research that is subsequently produced and valued. For example,
the requirement to publish abstracts and keywords in multiple languages (with English
explicitly mentioned in SciELO and RedALyC‘s lists), suggests that high-quality
research must be discoverable and, presumably, used outside of Latin America. Similarly,
the requirements for international authors and editorial board indicate that research
‗should‘ influence and be influenced from beyond the local context. Such criteria value
the global circulation of scientific knowledge, in spite of certain journals specifically
targeting local audiences (Meneghini et al., 2006).
Of those criteria for improving quality, perhaps the most important is the need for
peer review. Peer review is widely considered the cornerstone of editorial quality, but it is
surprising how many journals in the region still lack a well-defined editorial workflow
with peer review by those outside of the journal‘s own editorial board. During our own
experience conducting workshops in 11 Spanish-speaking Latin American countries18, we
anecdotally found that there is still a poor understanding of how peer review should be
conducted. The OA initiatives have brought peer-review to the forefront of conversations
between editors and those doing journal quality assessments, by making the requirement
explicit and through workshops on editorial practices.
19

18 Details of the workshop countries, content, and participants can be found in Fischman et al.
(2010) and at http://pkp.sfu.ca/español
19 In the last 4 years, RedALyC has held two international conferences with a workshop component
for journal editors. Details of the second meeting can be found at: 
Other criteria are aimed at organizing the journals‘ metadata and increasing their
visibility through improved indexing. In this category are the requirements to list article
metadata on each page, listing author names clearly, listing of editorial teams, and other
journal information. This point, seemingly trivial, can improve a journal‘s visibility in
remarkable ways. The following section discusses the way in which these OA initiatives
have played a role improving the organization and indexing of Latin American
scholarship, thus facilitating the flow of knowledge.

http://www.redalyc.org/congresoeditores2010/bienvenida2.jsp. Latindex and the International Network for
Scientific Publications (INASP) have partnered to provide workshops for editors and have held numerous
workshops in Argentina, Bolivia, Mexico, Costa Rica, and Nicaragua. For more information see:
http://www.inasp.info/file/10d4c8cde6d0034725cf0be35b0b176b/latindex.html
Table 1. Entrance requirements for Latindex, SciELO and RedALyC
Requirement Latindex*
SciELO** RedALyC***
mentions editorial team   
has a minimum number of original research articles   
author names and affiliations are clearly labeled   
adherence to publishing schedule   
displays a table of contents   
has and displays ISSN   
displays submission and acceptance dates   
displays abstracts in Englisha   
displays keywords in Englisha   
peer-review with at least two external reviewers   
indicates a citation style   
has and displays a publishing entity and location   
displays article metadata at the beginning of article  
has defined focus and scope or objectives  
forms part of any indexing system  
requests declaration of originality  
displays URL on homepage (electronic only)  
has minimum percentage of external authors  
has minimum percentage of external editorial board  
provides access to archives  
has existed for a minimum period of time  
displays name of director/manager of journal 
display publishing schedule 
mentions editorial board 
displays copyright policies 
minimum publishing schedule 
publishes a minimum number of articles per year 
* This list is a combination of the requirements for print journals and for electronic journals wishing to enter
the Latindex Catalogue. Some of the parameters are omitted from this list, while others were merged into a
single line item. Details an be found at http://www.latindex.org/latindex/catalogo.html
** Journals wishing to enter RedALyC do not need to meet all of these criteria. Some criteria are strictly
mandatory while others are specified on the basis of ―x number from this sub-list.‖ Many of these line
items are a combination of multiple requirements. Details can be found at
http://redalyc.uaemex.mx/redalyc/media/principal/auxHemeroteca/criterios.html
*** Each country is free to specify its own criteria for entering SciELO. This list was taken from the SciELO
Chile site. While the criteria for other SciELO sites is similar, it can vary on specific points from the
selection shown here. Details can be found at
http://www.scielo.cl/sr_scielocl/CriteriosObligatoriosScielo.pdf
a Latindex does not explicitly specify English as a second language
NB1: For the purposes of simplicity, this lists only the major requirements specified by all three portals, but
purposely leaves out some minor requirements present in only one of the three lists.
NB2: The requirements have not been literally translated in order to provide the commonality between the
three separately worded lists. 
Digital Organization
Beyond setting a standard for journal characteristics, the three portals have also advanced
the normalization and organization of metadata. In a highly digital publishing
environment, the importance of organizing article and journal information is essential for
a journal to participate in the electronic data exchange and to be indexed by search
engines and scholarly databases alike. The criteria, as well as the portals themselves, have
improved the electronic access to Latin American publications.
In a previous section, we argued that the OA initiatives have given greater visibility
to Latin American scholarship—at least in principle. By organizing the journal‘s
metadata and displaying it on their portals for search engines to index and for scholars to
search, all three major initiatives have increased the potential ―publicness‖ of hundreds of
journals. The result is that a large portion of Latin American scholarship is currently in
machine-discoverable format for a global public where it was not before. To their credit,
SciELO and RedALyC have transformed the research landscape by facilitating the paperto-digital
transition of the last decade, the effects of which remain to be understood.
However, the portals have not been alone in this regard. The adoption of journal
management software and institutional repository software has also played a defining
role. In particular, the growth of self-managed journals using Open Journal Systems
(OJS) (an open source journal management and publishing platform)20 and of
institutional repositories using, primarily, DSpace has been significant. As of August,
2010, there were 2,245 journals using OJS in Latin America (see Table 2 the for details).
The growth of institutional repositories is also notable, and while precise counts are not
available, the work of Pené (2010) points to their increasing presence.
21 Furthermore,
Brazil put forward a national law (Projeto de lei 1120/2007) requiring that all universities
have and receive funding for an institutional repository.
22 The use of such software and
its widespread adoption, combined with the OA portals, has done much for organizing
the digital scholarly production of the region.
The convergence of such Open Source tools and the Open Access movement more
broadly might not be fully realized in some realms (Willinsky, 2005), but its convergence
cannot be ignored with regards to Open Source software related to academic publishing.
Both OJS and DSpace are important such examples. Although not all journals using OJS
are OA, a sample of nearly one thousand OJS journal from around the world showed that
the software is primarily (83%) used to offer immediate OA to their online content
(Edgar & Willinsky, 2010). Similarly, and almost by definition, the vast majority of
institutional repositories are OA. Given the close coupling between the software itself
and the OA movement more broadly, the increased digital organization of scholarship
and its impact on LAU is affected by the Open Source and Open Access movements
alike.

20 In the interest of full disclosure, we would like to point out that we are part of the Public
Knowledge Project, creator of Open Journal Systems.
21 While there are several directories for Institutional Repositories (IR) to register themselves, there
seems to be a lack of interest in many institutions to register their repositories, leading to inaccurate counts
of IR growth worldwide.
22 The current state of legislation can be found at
http://www.camara.gov.br/sileg/Prop_Detalhe.asp?id=352237
Table 2. Number of journals by country currently using Open Journal Systems (August, 2010).
Country Journals
Argentina 69
Bolivia 25
Brazil 1,615
Chile 36
Colombia 235
Costa Rica 11
Cuba 11
El Salvador 2
Mexico 121
Nicaragua 1
Peru 3
Puerto Rico 12
Uruguay 2
Venezuela 102
TOTAL 2,245
Conclusions
The combination of OA and its related technologies has played a role in shaping
the scholarly communication landscape, especially when considering the expansion and
adoption by many universities of more research-intensive university models. In this
regard, the convergence of OA, Open Source, and the Internet, has been, as in other
contexts, both disruptive and constructive, but showing idiosyncratic Latin American
traits.
The OA initiatives and the OA-friendly software have shown this Latin American
distinctiveness. The fact that OA emerged in Latin America and that the OA initiatives
have become venues of high prestige has placed OA scholarship at the center of the
research-intensive LAU. Through the OA initiatives highlighted here, OA scholarship has
been shaping what research is evaluated and how. As the OA portals enter the evaluation
systems of universities and nations, their evaluation standards are adopted by the research
communities. This relationship is, of course, bi-directional. At the same time that the
community of scholars takes cues from the portals, the portals adapt their evaluation
practices to suit the needs of the community. However, the consolidation that is taking
place would not be possible without the digital organization of Latin American research,
to which the portals and software have greatly contributed.
OA and OA initiatives could not have such an impact, were it not for the distinct
qualities of the Latin American context in which they have emerged. In this paper, we
have chosen to highlight very specific realms in which OA has played a role, but we have
observed three other, more general, ways in with OA has affected the LAU.
First and in a very general way, OA has allowed increasingly numbers of Latin
American scholars to change their mode and style of participation in accessing as well as
producing scholarship that aspires to be both ―local & global.‖ However, while we
recognize that OA is not a magic wand that has solved all the scholarly and political
challenges involved in making the emerging scholarly production of the LAUs relevant 
for the local communities and for the international scientific communities, it is also
evident that it has created possibilities that were very hard to imagine to faculty working
in the LAU of a few decades ago.
Second, it is important to recognize that OA has played a significantly different
role among the faculty working in institutions of higher education in Latin America than
it has in Anglo-American and many Western European countries. While in the deeprooted
research intensive universities of the ―North‖ OA ―disrupted‖ traditional and large
scholarly communities and well-developed models of scientific, production and
communication in Latin America OA was also disruptive of the practices and styles of a
smaller group of scholars and their networks. Historically the number of LAU scholars
participating in the central/global discussions was very low and mostly located in the
macro-universities that concentrated the largest number of research intensive units. OA
was seen by many of those scholars who were already participants of the central science
discussion as a threat to the quality achieved by their centers, but it was also quickly
perceived as the most efficient way of strengthening the possibilities of an emerging and
larger than ever researcher population.
Third, while the landscape of scholarly communications in Anglo-American and
many Western European countries is dominated by commercial publishers, in Latin
America the dominant voices are universities and research centers. The region has a very
extended tradition of university presses and non-for profit scholarly publications. Given
this landscape, OA and its related technologies were rapidly embraced and had fewer
voices opposing their adoption.
Another distinctive characteristic of the LAU is the general social perception that
public institutions are the main producers of scientific knowledge in the region coupled
with very strong traditions about the ―public‖ role that the LAU needs to perform. With
the echoes of the reform of 1918 in Cordoba still heard in the halls of many universities,23
it is unsurprising that Open Access Latin American journals have been able to flourish in
an environment with growing accesses to the Internet and e-science (Plaz Power, 2009).
SciELO and RedALyC are two clear manifestations of the strong sense of ―publicness‖
embedded in many of the LAUs. These two institutions have given prominence to OA in
the region and this has, in turn, given credence to the evaluation practices of such OA
initiatives. Furthermore, the technologies surrounding online publishing have shaped the
digital landscape and increased the virtual presence of Latin American research. While it
is impossible to determine direct causation between these OA initiatives (and associated
technologies) on the quantity and quality of Latin American research, we must conclude
that they have been a crucial mechanism of support for researchers, universities, and for
national systems of innovation. We draw this conclusion because OA appears to be
contributing to the global integration and exchange of Latin America research and
scholarship by enabling LA literature to increase its global circulation (compared to print
and subscription models) and citations. This, in turn, is freeing up some portion of LA
library budgets for purchasing additional non-OA resources. Universities are thus able to

23 As can be seen by the very clear language used by the Declaration of the Regional
Conference on Higher Education in Latin America and the Caribbean: ―Higher education is a
social public good, a universal human right, and a responsibility of States. This is the conviction
and the basis for the strategic role that it should play in the processes of sustainable development
of the countries of the region‖ (CRES, 2008).
support the growth of research workforce by providing a means of launching peerreviewed
journals with global distribution (which subscription journals would not be able
to achieve). Finally, the development of portals such as SciELO, RedALyC, and Latindex
raised the profile as well as the quality of scholarly journals in Latin America. Even as
provisions need to be made for improving and developing the whole range of journals,
rather than focusing efforts on an exclusive set of ―qualified‖ titles, we see OA as a
critical aspect of the scholarly communication landscape in Latin America.
References
Alperin, J., Fischman, G., & Willinsky, J. 2008. Open Access and Scholarly Publishing in
Latin America: Ten flavours and a few reflections. Liinc em Revista, 4.
Albornoz, M., Matos Macedo M. Y Alfaraz C. 2010: ―Latin America‖, en L.Brito
(director): UNESCO Science Report 2010-the current status of science around the
world, UNESCO, p.77-101. Retrieved from:
http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/SC/pdf/sc_usr10_la_E
N.pdf
Arocena, R., & Sutz, J. 2001. Changing knowledge production and Latin American
universities. Research Policy, 30(8), 1221-1234. doi: 10.1016/S0048-
7333(00)00143-8.
Aupetit, S. D. 2007. Assessment of scientific productivity and restructuring of university
research systems in Latin America. Educación Superior y Sociedad, 12(1), 21-62.
Retrieved from http://ess.iesalc.unesco.org.ve/index.php/ess/article/view/23.
Babini, D. 2011. Acceso abierto a la producción científica de América Latina y el Caribe.
Identificación de principales instituciones para estrategias de integración regional.
Revista Iberoamericana de Ciencia, Tecnología y Sociedad, 6(17).Retrieved from:
http://www.revistacts.net/files/Volumen%206%20-
%20N%C3%BAmero%2017/babini_EDITADO_FINAL.pdf
Babini, D. & Fraga, J. (Eds.). 2006. Edición electrónica, bibliotecas virtuales y portales
para las ciencias sociales en América Latina y el Caribe. Buenos Aires: CLACSO.
Available from
http://bibliotecavirtual.clacso.org.ar/ar/libros/secret/babini/babini.html
De Bellis, N. (2009). Bibliometrics and Citation Analysis: From the Science Citation
Index to Cybermetrics (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press).
Bernasconi, A. 2007. Is there a Latin American model of the university? Comparative
Education Review, 75(1) 27-52.
Björk B-C, Welling P, Laakso M, Majlender P, Hedlund T, et al. 2010 Open Access to
the Scientific Journal Literature: Situation 2009. PLoS ONE
5(6): e11273. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0011273
Budapest Open Access Initiative. 2002. Retrieved from
http://www.soros.org/openaccess/read.shtml.
Chinchilla-Rodríguez, Miguel S, & Moya Anegón,(2010) F. Open access and Scopus: a
new approach to scientific visibility from the standpoint of access, unpublished
working paper Scimago research group, Spain
Didriksson, A. 2007. Contexto global y regional de la educación superior en América
Latina y el Caribe. In IESALC. Tendencias de la educación superior en América 
Latina y el Caribe, (pp. 1–43). Caracas: Instituto Internacional para la Educación
Superior en América Latina y el Caribe- UNESCO.
Edgar, B. D., & Willinsky, J. 2010. A Survey of the Scholarly Journals Using Open
Journal Systems. Scholarly and Research Communication, 1(2), 1-22.
Fischman, G. E. 2008. Las universidades públicas en el siglo XXI. Grandes expectativas,
algunas promesas y muchas incertidumbres. Universitas Humanística, 66(2), 239–
270.
Fischman, G., Alperin, J., & Willinsky, J. 2010. Visibility and Quality in SpanishLanguage
Latin American Scholarly Publishing. Information Technology &
International Development, 6(4), 1-21. Retrieved from http://pkp.sfu.ca/node/3347.
Gentili, P., & Levy, B. 2005. Espacio público y privatización del conocimiento: estudios
sobre políticas universitarias en América Latina. Buenos Aires: CLACSO.
Guédon, J. C. 2010. Acesso Aberto e divisão entre ciência predominante e ciência
periférica. In S. M. Soares Pinto Ferreira & M. das Graças Targino (Eds.),
Desmistificando a acessibilidade e a visibilidade de revistas científicas eletrônicas.
São Paulo: Senac. Retrieved from
http://www.citeulike.org/user/JSicot/article/2073899.
Hermes-Lima, M., Santos, N. C. F., Alencastro, A. C. R., & Ferreira, S. T. 2007. Whither
Latin America? Trends and challenges of science in Latin America. IUBMB life,
59(4-5), 199-210. doi: 10.1080/15216540701258751.
Hitchcock, Stephen (2011). The effect of open access and downloads ('hits') on citation
impact: a bibliography of studies. Open Citation Project.
http://opcit.eprints.org/oacitation-biblio.html
Holdom, S. (2005). E-Journal Proliferation in Emerging Economies: The Case of Latin
America. Lit Linguist Computing, 20, 351-365. doi: 10.1093/llc/fqi033.
Lillis, T., & Curry, M. J. 2010. Academic Writing in a Global Context: The politics and
practices of publishing in English, 224. Routledge. Retrieved from
http://oro.open.ac.uk/17055/.
López Segrera, F. 2007. Educación superior internacional comparada. Escenarios, temas
y problemas. Caracas: IESALC.
Malagón Plata, L. A. (2005). Cambios y conflictos en los discursos político-pedagógicos
sobre la universidad archivos analíticos de políticas educativas. Education Policy
Analysis Archives, 13(21), Retrieved July 15, 2008, from
epaa.asu.edu/ojs/article/view/127
Marcano, D., & Phélan, M. (2009). Evolución y desarrollo del programa de promoción
del investigador en Venezuela. Interciencia, 34(1), 17–24. Asociación Interciencia.
Retrieved from http://www.scielo.org.ve/scielo.php?pid=S0378-
18442009000100005&script=sci_pdf.
Mc Veigh M. (2004) Open Access Journals in the ISI Citation Databases: Analysis of
Impact Factors and Citation Patterns – A Citation study from Thomson Scientific,
Thomson Scientfic, http://science.thomsonreuters.com/m/pdfs
/openaccesscitations2.pdf.
Melero, R. 2010. ¿Hablamos de Open Access?. Revista española de salud pública, 44(5),
241-3. Retrieved from http://scielo.isciii.es/pdf/resp/v84n2/editorial.pdf.
Meneghini, R., Mugnaini, R., & Packer, A. L. 2006. International versus national
oriented Brazilian scientific journals. A scientometric analysis based on SciELO and 
JCR-ISI databases. Scientometrics, 69, 529-538. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11192-006-0168-z.
Ordorika, I. & Pusser, B. 2007. ―La maxima cases de estudios: The Universidad nacional
autónoma de México as a State-Building University,‖ in Research Universities in
Asia and Latin America. World Class Worldwide, ed. Philip Altbach and Jorge
Balan (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press 189-215.
Ordorika, I. 2009. Universidades y globalización: tendencias hegemónicas y construcción
de alternativas. Educación Superior y Sociedad, 12(1), 175. Retrieved from
http://ess.iesalc.unesco.org.ve/index.php/ess/article/viewArticle/28.
Packer, A. L., & Meneghini, R. 2007. Learning to Communicate Science in Developing
Countries. Interciencia, 32, 643-647. Retrieved from
http://www.scielo.org.ve/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0378-
18442007000900014&lng=en&nrm=iso&ignore=.html.
Pené, M. G. 2010, April. Nuevas estrategias para la gestión de colecciones en bibliotecas
universitarias a partir del advenimiento de los repositorios institucionales. Paper
presented at Congreso Internacional de Información 2010, Habana, Cuba. Retrieved
from http://www.fuentesmemoria.fahce.unlp.edu.ar/trab_eventos/ev.702/ev.702.pdf
Plaz Power, I. 2009. El contexto de la ciencia-e en Latinoamérica. Apologíias,
oportunidades y desafíios. Educación Superior y Sociedad, 12(1), 191. Retrieved
from http://ess.iesalc.unesco.org.ve/index.php/ess/article/viewArticle/29.
RICYT. 2010. Red de Indicadores de Ciencia y Tecnología -Iberoamericana e
Interamericana. Retrieved from http://ricyt.org/.
Romero-Torres, M., M.A. Tejada, and A. Acosta. (2010). Proposal to Classify Latin
American Scientific Journals using citation indicators: Case study in Colombia.
Available at: http://arxiv.org/pdf/1101.2711.
Suber, P. 2011. Open Access Overview (Definition, Introduction). Retrieved from
http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/overview.htm
Terra-Figari, L. 2007. Diseminación del Conocimiento Académico en América Latina.
Sonnia Romero Gorski, S. (comp.) Anuario de Antropologia Social y Cultural en
Uruguay, Montevideo, Uruguay: Editorial Nordan–Comunidad, 193-207.
Thorn, K. & Soo, M. 2006. Latin American universities and the third mission. Trends,
challenges and policy options. Research Working Paper 4002. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Villanueva, E. 2006. Accidental open access and the hazards involved: Preliminary
experiences on Internet-based publishing in a Peruvian university. First Monday,
11(6-5). Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1333.
Willinsky, J. 2006. The Access Principle: The Case for Open Access to Research and
Scholarship (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2006).
Willinsky, J. 2005. The Unacknowledged Convergence of Open Source, Open Access,
and Open Science. First Monday, 10(8).