1
Willinsky, J. & Alperin, J. P. (2011). The academic ethics of open access to research
and scholarship, Ethics and Education, 6(3)
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17449642.2011.632716.
Stanford University makes this peer-reviewed draft available under a Creative
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial License. The published version is available
from the publisher, subscribing libraries, and the author.
The Academic Ethics of Open Access to Research and Scholarship
Professor John Willinsky, Stanford University
Juan Pablo Alperin, Stanford University
Abstract: In this paper we present the case for regarding the principles by which
scholarly publications are disseminated and shared as a matter of academic ethics. The
ethics of access have to do with recognizing people’s right to know what is known, as
well as the value to humanity of having one of its best forms of arriving at knowledge as
widely shared as possible. The level of access is often reduced by the financial interests
of publishers in a market in which there is little sense of a rational order, given huge
discrepancies in prices for similar products. At the same time, there are risks to limiting
researchers access to scholarly resources, both for the quality of the knowledge that is not
entirely open to review and for the production of new knowledge that it might inspire.
Then there are issues of access beyond the academy for professional practice and out of
human interest, for both of which undue limitations raise what are, for us, more than
academic ethical questions.
In introducing a recent collection of essays, Creating the Ethical Academy, Tricia
Bentham Gallant, the Academic Integrity Coordinator for the University of California,
San Diego, and Lester F. Goodchild, professor of Higher Education at Santa Clara
University, place the ethical focus squarely on the misconduct of students, admission 
2
officers, and faculty members. They ask, in light of the repeated media coverage of
cheating, bending, and fudging of the rules of academic conduct, “are we heading down a
road of inevitable corruption? Or is there an alternative way forward?” (2010, p. 3).
Attending to those who break the rules is a common enough approach to academic ethics.
This approach carries with it, however, the implication that, if and when such misconduct
is eliminated, ethical questions would politely disappear from view. We raise this point
because our contribution to this special issue of Ethics and Education “in search of the
ethical university” takes a somewhat different approach to finding an alternative way
forward for the ethical academy.
We are treating the ethical domain as a realm of positive action – in which, for example,
one goes out of one’s way to help someone – rather than an arena of moral failings, as
suggested by exam cheating and research fudging. We believe that with the coming of the
digital era, the university faces an unprecedented ethical opportunity to act in a positive
fashion by reaching out to help others. We wish to present the ethical case for going out
of one’s way to ensure that one’s research and scholarship has been made as widely
available as possible to other scholars around the world, as well as to interested members
of the public. With this approach, we are following, in effect, the identification by Gallant
and Patrick Drinan, a political science professor at the University of San Diego, of the
university’s “ethical center – which is, after all, the infrastructure and base for the pursuit
and transmission of knowledge” (2010, p. 215). As this ethical center moves into the
twenty-first century, the new digital publishing medium affords higher education a whole
new range of opportunities for sharing what is discovered and learned within these
institutions. The literature on the contribution and value of “open access” (OA), as it is 
3
widely known, to scholarly research continues to grown dramatically during the first
decade of the twenty-first century (Bailey, 2010). We recognize that there is a host of
related ethical issues associated with openness and the academic integrity of research and
scholarship.1 However, the ethics of access to the published literature takes on a
particularly timely, if not urgent, quality amid the relatively rapid transition from the
print culture to digital publishing for scholarly journals (and soon, perhaps, scholarly
books). While other ethical dilemmas, such as cheating and fudging, have a timeless
quality to them, there is something of a limited-time opportunity for ethical action when
publishing models are changing and in this unsettled period are radically split between
tendencies toward increasingly restrictive (for reasons of profit) and open (for a wider
sharing) practices. There are even some very recent signs of some crossover, with
publishers looking to advance profits through open access, with the financial
consequences providing their own potential damper on the circulation of knowledge.
Thus there is a need to consider the wide, if sometimes confusing, range of initiatives
underway to direct this new publishing medium toward a more ethical and responsible
approach to the basic human right to know and to knowledge. To ensure that the
momentum gained around greater access over the last decade is not lost, we review the
ethical dimensions of OA in scholarly communication. Much within the current academic
culture of publish-and-perish-the-thought-of-doing-anything-more-with-the-work
militates against the extra effort that is still required to ensure that the work done by
scholars and researchers is distributed as widely and fairly (in terms of costs to readers)
as possible. Once there was a time when having a study published in a scholarly journal
was the only way to make the work public in timely and responsible (peer-reviewed) 
4
way. Publishing it in a highly reputed journal further guaranteed that the work was more
widely circulated, as such journals had more subscribers. There was no more to do than
that, except perhaps respond to those preprinted postcards, typically from Eastern Europe,
requesting an “off-print” of your paper, which they had somehow caught wind of.
That is no longer the case. As libraries struggle to afford even their current subscriptions,
the new means of achieving almost universal online access presents itself. We, as
scholars, face new responsibilities for thinking about how widely our work circulates,
which does not preclude publishing in the prestigious journals, but which does call for a
more ethical approach to the sharing of our work.
During the first decade of this century, there has been an active debate about OA within
the scholarly publishing field. It has typically involved advocates calling for
transparency, fairness, and accountability on one side, while opponents of OA express
concerns over unproven economic models and the threats posed to the quality and
sustainability of peer-reviewed scholarly publishing if the money is not there, on the
other (Davis, 2009). OA advocates hold that people do not only have an ethical right to
this knowledge, but that the wider circulation achieved by OA is better for the quality and
utilization (as well as the public support) of this knowledge. The advocates have been
rag-tag group of researchers, scholar publishers, and a few well-financed OA publishers,
such as BioMed Central (for-profit and now owned by Springer) and PLoS (non-profit
foundation-funded). The opponents of OA are the corporate and society publishers,
operating through organizations such as the International Organization of Science,
Technical and Medical Publishers, where concern has been expressed that “achieving 
5
widespread sustainability for open access journals will not be particularly quick or easy”
given that the two leaders in OA publishing, BioMed Central and PLoS, were not “even
close to profitability,” while fear abounded that OA would have “have a serious impact
on journal subscriptions” (Ware, 2006, p. 4). In this way, some publishers have turned
OA into an ethical dilemma: Do efforts to make research and scholarship more widely
available to the public, educators, and scholars justify placing publisher and society
revenues at risk?
We think that the answer is an emphatic yes, especially given the lack of evidence of such
a risk at this point. The economic viability of the various open access models may not be
assured in this time of transition, with bookstores closing and the record industry in a
tailspin. However, the Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ; http://www.doaj.org/)
operated by the University of Lund Library lists well over 6,000 OA peer-reviewed
journals. This includes large commercial publishers such as BioMed Central, thousands
of small journals, and everything in between. The Public Knowledge Project
(http://pkp.sfu.ca) is tracking over 8,000 OA journals using its open source software
(Open Journal Systems) the majority of which are not in DOAJ. It difficult to tell what
percentage of journals are OA, as the commonly used total of 25,000 journals (Harnad et
al., 2004) is clearly itself only a portion of the journals currently being published.
Still, it can be said that a good number of journals are making a go of it with OA. A study
of the journals using the free open source software developed by Public Knowledge
Project (with which we work) found that the scholar-publisher dominates these titles,
with an average per-article cost under $200 USD (Edgar & Willinsky, 2010). In addition, 
6
the majority of large commercial publishers now provide an OA choice within their
subscriptions journals. That is, authors can purchase OA, in effect, for their individual
article through a substantial “article processing fee,” in the area of $3,000, paid for by the
author’s research account or institution. A number of major corporate publishers, such as
the Nature Group and Wiley, have recently announced new journals that will be OA, on
this article-processing fee basis.2
This could well signal a shift in publishing models. If
publishers move their economic model from high-priced subscription journals to highpriced
article-processing fees, that may well put new pressures on research budgets and,
for those without generous funding, university budgets. This commercialization of OA
will need to be evaluated in comparison to non-commercial approaches, including those
pursued by the vast majority of OA journals, which do not charge article-processing fees.
A second channel to open access that also appears to be proving itself economically is the
author self-archiving route. Somewhat more than 60% of all publishers (including the
publisher of this journal) allow authors to deposit their pre-prints and/or post-prints in
OA archives or on their websites (SHERPA/RoMEO, 2011). In the case of one of the
oldest pre-print repositories known as arXiv.org, the time from deposit to citation has
decreased as the repository approaches 100% of the publications in high energy particle
physics and astrophysics (Swan, 2007). Providing pre-prints (post peer-review) ensures a
rapid turnaround between research and uptake, without sacrificing quality. There are now
over 1,800 open access repositories in which to deposit their pre- or post-prints (ROAR,
2011). According to one estimate, the time needed to self-archive is less than 10 minutes
per paper and, assuming that any one of the co-authors can perform the work, even a
prolific scholar would need to invest no more than 40 minutes per year on self-archiving 
7
time (Carr & Harnad, 2005). The few keystrokes and time cannot, by any standard, be
considered onerous and the institutional repository alternative provides an answer to
those who are concerned about the quality of OA journals.
The willingness of commercial publishers to adopt OA policies for their authors
demonstrates that the publishing industry itself accepts the ethical imperative of OA.
They are not taking any chances with this perceived risk, and are allowing that it may yet
play a role in their long-term sustainability if not profitability. We would be remiss in
overlooking some the potential effects of researchers making their work available as soon
as it has been accepted through an institutional or central repository. When looking at the
entire research cycle, the time between finishing the research and it being used is one of
the only aspects of the cycle that can easily be improved. For their part, publishers have
yet to report a decline in subscription revenue that can be attributed to author archiving,
although they have observed a drop in visits to their websites, which they blame on OA
(Ware, 2006, p. 4). As a result of these various efforts, somewhat more than twenty
percent of the literature published in 2009 has been made available on an open access
basis through authors archiving their work or publishing in open access journals (Björk et
al., 2010). It all adds up to a certain viability for OA, and reduces the ethical dilemma
posed by publishers who hold that OA places publisher revenues at risk and thus
undermines the very publishing process.
The other side of this ethical question concerns the demonstrable value of OA. Is it
having any impact on the readership and utilization of the work that is being made freely
available? The evidence gathered to date indicates that this is the case. Work that is made 
8
OA is attracting more readers than similar materials that have not been made OA; what
can also be said is that OA materials are also being cited more often, according to the
majority of studies that Stephen Hitchcock surveys on this phenomenon (2011). This
vanity and career-advancing aspect of OA may even seem to compromise the ethical
element of more widely circulating this knowledge. Professorial vanity poses as an
ethical risk, as noted by Steven M. Cahn, former provost of the Graduate Center, CUNY,
in introducing the twenty-fifth anniversary edition of his Saints and Scamps: Ethics in
Academia (2011). But this OA advantage in citations and readership is also part of the
transition, with early adopters rewarded, while others play catch-up, at which point the
vanity-advantage disappears.
Where the large publishers have joined in on the efforts to provide OA out of an ethical
concern for access in the world’s poorest nations, as with bio-medical (the HINARI
program), agricultural (the AGORA program) and environmental research the (the
OPARE program), the impact has been considerable. For example, 2.5 million PDFs have
been downloaded by non-research institutions in developing countries alone (medical
schools, teaching hospitals, and government offices) between 2003 and 2006 through the
World Health Organization’s Health InterNetwork Access to Research Initiative
(HINARI, 2006). However, this only points to the ethical gap faced by developing
countries that are not poor enough to qualify for these programs, such as India, as well as
the disciplines and areas of knowledge that are not covered by these programs (Aronson,
2004).
Now some have also argued against OA by pointing out that some sensitive research 
9
material could pose a risk to the public. Controversial cases, such as the alleged link
between MMR vaccines and Autism, have been used as examples (Wakefield et al.,
1998). We would argue that limiting access on the basis of financial resources is not an
ethical, but rather an expedient, way to protect the public interest. The public, in turn,
benefits from being able to judge the evidence for themselves, by reading both the
original Wakefield et al. (1998) article and the evidence of fraud (Deer, 2011). However,
we are willing to concede that those who seriously believe that their research would cause
harm if released to the public are exempt from any moral obligation to distribute their
work widely. However, it is worth noting that the U.S. and U.K. governments have
recognized that access to health research sponsored by the National Health Institute and
the Department of Health/National Institute for Health Research, respectively, should be
made publicly available to health personnel and patients (NIH, 2011; DH/NIHR, 2011).
However, the same principle applies to other fields, even if not all have such direct
implications for physical well-being. As a further endorsement of the OA approach to
sharing knowledge, just under 200 funding agencies and institutions (including
departments and some entire universities) have passed policies calling for the deposit of
at least the final draft of published work in OA archives (ROARMAP, 2011).
Be that as it may, it would be unfair to characterize this as an issue of the wealthy
needing to provide access to the poor, not least because much of the research that goes
behind pay barriers originates in lower-income countries. In the North American context,
the rising costs of subscriptions are placing limits on what even the wealthiest libraries
can afford (ARL, 2006; K4All, 2011) and students have begun to claim a right to open
access research (Right to Research Coalition, 2011), as too have taxpayers and patient 
10
advocacy groups (Alliance, 2011). The voices of librarians, students, patients, and
scholars on the issue are a sufficient indication that there is a demand for greater access.
The university has long been regarded as a center of knowledge creation, one that has
often been held to strict ethical standards. And certainly when it comes to the best ways
of engaging in scholarly publishing, we can accept that there will be debate as to where
the balance lies in terms of how to organize, finance, and structure this increased access
to knowledge. What we cannot do is ignore the ethical dimensions of this issue. We must
come to a shared understanding of what our obligations are in undertaking this research
and scholarship. As we found in recent work on academic ethics, even those who are
taking the lead in defining the scope of ethical matters in higher education have yet to
consider the moral good to be realized by taking advantage of new technologies to
increase access to research and scholarship. Our hope is that as we might move forward
“in search of the ethical university,” so that the ways and means by which we distribute
what we have learned, as a matter of public trust and public good, might become more
public and widely available. It seems like the right thing to do.
References
Alliance for Taxpayer Access. 2011. Retrieved from http://www.taxpayeraccess.org/.
ARL. 2006. Monograph and serial expenditures in ARL libraries, 1986-2006. Retrieved
from http://www.arl.org/bm~doc/monser06.pdf 23 March 2011.
Aronson, B. 2004. Improving online access to medical information for low-income
countries. The New England journal of medicine 350(10), 966-8. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14999107 23 March 2011.
Bailey, C. Jr. 2010. Transforming scholarly publishing through open access: A
bibliography. Retrieved from http://digital-scholarship.org/tsp/transforming.htm
11
Björk B-C; Welling P, Laakso M, Majlender, P, Hedlund, T, & Gudnasson, G. 2009.
Open access to the scientific journal literature: Situation, PLoS ONE 23(6). doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0011273 23 March 2011.
Cahn, S.M. 2010. Saints and Scamps: Ethics in academia. Plymouth, UK: Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers.
Carr, L., & Harnad, S. 2005. Keystroke economy: A study of the time and effort involved
in self-archiving. Retrieved from http://eprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/10688/ 23 March
2011.
Davis, P.M. 2009. How the media frames open access. Info 12(1). Retrieved from doi:
10.3998/3336451.0012.101 23 March 2011.
Deer, B. 2011. How the case against the MMR vaccine was fixed. British Medical
Journal 342:c5347
DH/NIHR. (2011). DH / NIHR funded research and UK PubMed Central. Retrieved
from
http://www.nihr.ac.uk/research/Pages/Research_Open_Access_Policy_Statement.asp
x 23 March 2011.
Edgar, B. D., & Willinsky, J. 2010. A survey of the scholarly journals using Open
Journal Systems. Scholarly and Research Communication 1(2). Retrieved from
http://journals.sfu.ca/src/index.php/src/article/view/24/41 23 March 2011.
Eysenbach G. 2006. Citation advantage of open access articles. PLoS Biol 4(5).
Gallant, T. B. & Goodchild, L. F. 2010. Introduction, in T. B. Gallant, (Ed.) Creating an
ethical academy: A systems approach to understanding misconduct and empowering
change, pp. 3-12. New York, NY: Routledge.
Gallant, T. B. & Drinan, P. 2010. The Future of the Ethical academy: Preliminary
Thoughts and Suggestions in T. B. Gallant, (Ed.) Creating an ethical academy: A
systems approach to understanding misconduct and empowering change, pp. 215-
218. New York, NY: Routledge.
Harnad, S., Brody, T., Vallieres, F., Carr, L., Hitchcock, S., Gingras, Y., Oppenheim, C.,
Hajjem, C., & Hilf, E. 2004. The access/impact problem and the green and gold
roads to open access: An update. Serials Review 34: 36-40.
HINARI. 2006, September 6. Who is Using HINARI. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 84(9), 685-764. Retrieved from
http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/84/9/hinari_0906/en/index.html 23 March
2011.
12
Hitchcock S. 2011. The effect of open access and downloads ('hits') on citation impact: A
bibliography of studies. Unpublished annotated bibliography. Retrieved from
http://www.opcit.eprints.org/oacitation-biblio.html 23 March 2011.
K4All. 2011, February 2. Press release - Librarians are angry and they're not going to
take it anymore. Retrieved from http://www.k4all.ca/news/2011/02/press-releaselibrarians-are-angry-and-theyre-not-going-take-it-anymore
23 March 2011.
NIH. 2011. NIH Public Access Policy Details. http://publicaccess.nih.gov/policy.htm
Right to Research Coalition. 2011. Retrieved from http://www.righttoresearch.org
ROARMAP: Registry of open access repository material archiving policies. 2011.
Retrieved from http://roarmap.eprints.org/ 23 March 2011.
SHERPA/RoMEO. 2011. Statistics on publishers' copyright policies & self-archiving.
Retrieved from http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo/statistics.php 23 March 2011.
Swan, A. 2007. Open access and the progress of science: the power to transform research
communication may be at each scientist's fingertips. American Scientist. Retrieved
from http://www.americanscientist.org/issues/pub/open-access-and-the-progress-ofscience
23 March 2011
Wakefield A.J., Murch S.H., Anthony A., Linnell J., Casson D.M., Malik M., Berelowitz
M., Dhillon A.P., Thomson M.A., Harvey P., Valentine A., Davies S.E., WalkerSmith
J.A. 1998. Ileal-lymphoid-nodular hyperplasia, non-specific colitis, and
pervasive developmental disorder in children. Lancet 351(9103), 637–41.
Ware, M. 2006. Scientific publishing in transition: an overview of current developments.
Bristol: Mark Ware Consulting.
Wellen, R. 2004. Taking on commercial scholarly journals: Reflections on the open
access movement. Journal of Academic Ethics 2(1), 101-118.

NOTES
1 Richard Wellen calls OA advocates to task for failing to recognize that the
commercialization of research itself (for example, by pharmaceuticals) is “almost
certainly a greater long-run threat to openness than today’s publication system”
(2004, p. 14).
2
For Nature Group see http://www.nature.com/srep/marketing/index.html; for
Wiley see http://www.wileyopenaccess.com/view/index.html. 